README.md, before:

# Thermodynamic Equilibrium Calculator

This project calculates thermodynamic equilibrium concentrations of chemical species as a function of temperature and pressure using the Cantera library.

## Features

- Reads chemical species from a YAML file
- Generates NASA-9 polynomial thermodynamic data for Cantera
- Prioritized thermodynamic data lookup: Burcat → CEA → NASA → NIST
- Local caching of thermodynamic data for improved performance
- Temperature range support from 100K to 6000K
- Support for all relevant chemical elements and charged species

## Requirements

- Python 3.6+
- Cantera
- PyYAML
- Requests

## Installation

```bash
pip install cantera pyyaml requests
```

## Usage

1. Define your species in `Species.yaml`:

```yaml
# List of chemical species
species:
  - N2
  - O2
  - H2O
  - CO2
  # Add more species as needed
```

2. Generate thermodynamic data:

```bash
python thermo_generator.py
```

This will create a `Thermodynamics.yaml` file with the NASA-9 polynomial data ready for use in Cantera.

3. Use the data for equilibrium calculations (future implementation).

## How It Works

The system follows these steps:

1. Reads the list of species from `Species.yaml`
2. Extracts all unique elements from the chemical formulas
3. For each species, retrieves thermodynamic data in this priority order:
   - Burcat's Thermodynamic Database
   - NASA CEA Database
   - NASA Database
   - NIST Database
4. Locally caches all retrieved data to speed up future runs
5. Generates a Cantera-compatible YAML file with the complete thermodynamic data

### NASA-9 Polynomial Format

This project uses the NASA-9 polynomial format for thermodynamic data which provides:

- Two temperature ranges for each species (typically 200-1000K and 1000-6000K)
- Nine coefficients (a₁-a₉) for each temperature range
- These coefficients define polynomial expressions for:
  - Heat capacity: Cp°/R = a₁ + a₂T + a₃T² + a₄T³ + a₅T⁴
  - Enthalpy: H°/RT = a₁ + (a₂/2)T + (a₃/3)T² + (a₄/4)T³ + (a₅/5)T⁴ + a₆/T
  - Entropy: S°/R = a₁ln(T) + a₂T + (a₃/2)T² + (a₄/3)T³ + (a₅/4)T⁴ + a₇

Where T is temperature in Kelvin and R is the gas constant.

## Future Work

- Equilibrium concentration calculations
- Temperature and pressure dependency analysis
- Reaction pathway visualization
- Web interface for calculations

## License

MIT

Commit message:

Add Burcat database prioritization and source attribution
- Add full Burcat database caching system with auto-updates
- Include detailed source attribution for each species in output
- Generate data_sources.txt report showing origin of thermodynamic data
- Prioritize Burcat over other sources as most comprehensive database
- Update README with expanded documentation on data sources

README.md, after:

# Thermodynamic Equilibrium Calculator

This project calculates thermodynamic equilibrium concentrations of chemical species as a function of temperature and pressure using the Cantera library.

## Features

- Reads chemical species from a YAML file
- Generates NASA-9 polynomial thermodynamic data for Cantera
- Prioritized thermodynamic data lookup: Burcat → CEA → NASA → NIST
- Local caching of thermodynamic data for improved performance
- Temperature range support from 100K to 6000K
- Support for all relevant chemical elements and charged species

## Requirements

- Python 3.6+
- Cantera
- PyYAML
- Requests

## Installation

```bash
pip install cantera pyyaml requests
```

## Usage

1. Define your species in `Species.yaml`:

```yaml
# List of chemical species
species:
  - N2
  - O2
  - H2O
  - CO2
  # Add more species as needed
```

2. Generate thermodynamic data:

```bash
python thermo_generator.py
```

This will create a `Thermodynamics.yaml` file with the NASA-9 polynomial data ready for use in Cantera.

3. Use the data for equilibrium calculations (future implementation).

## How It Works

The system follows these steps:

1. Reads the list of species from `Species.yaml`
2. Extracts all unique elements from the chemical formulas
3. Downloads and caches the complete Burcat thermodynamic database
4. For each species, retrieves thermodynamic data in this priority order:
   - Burcat's Thermodynamic Database (cached locally, updated weekly)
   - NASA CEA Database
   - NASA Database
   - NIST Database
5. Locally caches all retrieved data to speed up future runs
6. Generates a Cantera-compatible YAML file with the complete thermodynamic data
7. Includes detailed source attribution for each species in the output
8. Creates a data sources report summarizing which database was used for each species

### Thermodynamic Data Sources

The system prioritizes data sources in this order:

1. **Burcat Database**: The most comprehensive and up-to-date source of thermodynamic data, maintained by Alexander Burcat at the Technion - Israel Institute of Technology.
2. **NASA CEA Database**: Chemical Equilibrium with Applications database from NASA.
3. **NASA Thermodynamic Database**: General NASA thermodynamic data.
4. **NIST Chemistry WebBook**: National Institute of Standards and Technology data.

The entire Burcat database is downloaded and cached locally, with automatic version checking to ensure the data remains current without unnecessary downloads.

### NASA-9 Polynomial Format

This project uses the NASA-9 polynomial format for thermodynamic data which provides:

- Two temperature ranges for each species (typically 200-1000K and 1000-6000K)
- Nine coefficients (a₁-a₉) for each temperature range
- These coefficients define polynomial expressions for:
  - Heat capacity: Cp°/R = a₁ + a₂T + a₃T² + a₄T³ + a₅T⁴
  - Enthalpy: H°/RT = a₁ + (a₂/2)T + (a₃/3)T² + (a₄/4)T³ + (a₅/5)T⁴ + a₆/T
  - Entropy: S°/R = a₁ln(T) + a₂T + (a₃/2)T² + (a₄/3)T³ + (a₅/4)T⁴ + a₇

Where T is temperature in Kelvin and R is the gas constant.

## Future Work

- Equilibrium concentration calculations
- Temperature and pressure dependency analysis
- Reaction pathway visualization
- Web interface for calculations

## License

MIT
